foreign
to the portals project is the inquiry
about the future and The evolutionary
change underway
we seek to perceive what is emerging at
the edge of The Human Experience
to decode and integrate insights about
how we humans are evolving through this
liminal transition
crispage is a professor emeritus in the
department of philosophy and religious
studies at Youngstown State University
where he taught for 33 years
a fellow at The Institute of noetic
Sciences
Chris is the author of The Living
classroom
teaching and Collective consciousness
and of Dark Knight early Dawn
steps to a deep equality of mind
and his third book LSD and the mind of
the universe
diamonds from heaven where Chris
describes his 20 years of intensive work
through 73 LSD sessions
in the interest of transparency I have
never touched LSD and never touched any
psychedelic or any mushroom
my own 42 years of Journey to unlock the
universal human potential was centered
on the premise that the human brain when
we are open to the blessing Realms is
the most advanced chemistry and
pharmaceutical production unit in the
universe
and I've applied my spiritual and
development search in ways that promote
naturally arising States and inner
conductivity
so we are not here to recommend that you
should do anything
I've invited Chris because Chris of your
rigor and focused inquiry
which are profound and your account
where you frame insights and
perspectives
there are of great interest as we seek
to appreciate what is emerging at the
edge of human consciousness
Chris welcome
thank you Aviv it's a real pleasure to
be here with you today
so you have already lived several
lifetimes in this one life
you've had a full academic career you
published three books you've raised a
family and three children and alongside
all of this you've done this intense
20 years research work
so let me first ask what is the portal
you are in right now what is the inquiry
you're working on at this time
well when I published LSD in the mind of
the universe or as I prefer to call it
diamonds from Heaven that's its name for
me
when I published that I felt like I had
accomplished my life's work I mean after
a long career of teaching as a
philosopher of religion this was my most
important gift to the history of
philosophical inquiry into the deep
structure of existence
uh and that brought with it a tremendous
sense of closure and relaxation and
since the book has come out into the
world uh three years ago now just about
three years I've just been content to
follow the book out into the world and
to follow into conversations that people
want to have around the issues that have
come up with the book I don't have any
agenda I don't have any felt need to
achieve anything
I have moved to North Carolina in the
last three years
and so I've been doing a lot of yard
work my hands are in the soil and all
those basic things
I have children and grandchildren that I
love to stay in touch with as often as I
can they live farther away they're not
close by so that takes some work
uh so I'm kind of growing old in a
comfortable place
I am
cultivating a form a way of spiritual
practice
that builds upon the systematic
remembering
of the experiences that I had on the 73
days covered in my book
and those are living memories for me
and I'm experimenting with how to use
those memories
to more deeply absorb and integrate the
realities that I touched very intimately
on those session days
so we will pick up this thread which is
fascinating you're describing a
condition where a memory is not frozen
in time it's a living
dream of intelligence that continues to
inform you even into into the here and
now and and we will pick this up as as
we unfold the conversation
in his forward to your book Evan Laszlo
writes this is one of the most
insightful and significant books I have
ever read
but to understand its significance one
must be willing to entertain three
premises
a there is an intelligence behind the
things that exist in the universe be
that there is Purpose exhibited By this
intelligence and see
that it is humanly possible to access
some elements of this intelligence and
learn some aspects of its purpose
so I'm interested given the way you're
describing Where You Are
how is this deliberation
unfolding for you in terms of your
belief your feeling about these three
premises a that the universe is an
intelligent place that there is a an
inherent or latent purpose and that we
actually have as humans the capacity
to unpair to connect or to decode
both
[Music]
those premises are absolutely
foundational to my lived reality these
days the the world view that I was
educated in in graduate school is the
scientific worldview or the early
20th century scientific worldview that
the world is basically a fantastic
machine it has no innate intelligence
intelligence is a lucky accident that
sprung up somewhere along the way that
our existence is accidental it's not
purposive and that when we die when our
brain ceases to function correctly then
our Consciousness disappears and we so
there is no existential meaning or
significance to our lives
and all of those assumptions have been
overturned in my psychedelic work
what I found is that by dissolving into
the deeper levels of my own mind I
opened beyond my own personal existence
into the mind of the universe itself
and in that process repeatedly over and
over again through many years came into
communion
with an intelligence that was profound
just
extraordinarily brilliant and vast
Beyond imagination and compassionate
beyond measure
and so returning to that intelligence
and drinking from it and being willing
to undergo very challenging processes of
initiation but always being rewarded
with deeper intimacy with this
intelligence that the Universe I now
live in is saturated with intelligence
at all the levels I can see and at
levels I can't see
I the world I live in intellectually and
emotionally is a world of Genius
unfolding itself systematically over
vast epics of time
and it's also a world in which
Humanities participation in this
creative Endeavor is not a participation
that's limited to a hundred year
lifetime or a one single lifetime but
it's a participation that continues
lifetime after lifetime after lifetime
through the process that we classically
have known as reincarnation
but it's larger than that it's that our
our entire species and the development
of this planet and this solar system in
this galaxy is all part of a an
Exquisite purposeful
systematic unfolding of the creative
power of this creative intelligence and
I hesitate to call it God or call it the
Divine because as a professor of
religious studies I know how that word
has been used and I know what it has
come to mean in different cultures
around the world and while part of it is
good and beautiful and so many other
parts of it are limiting so I prefer to
speak in terms of the creative
intelligence of the universe
uh the intelligence that is behind
existence and the intelligence that is
inside existence expressing itself in
the complexity of life
so in many ways you have just given us
the the condensed
preview version of the the everything we
are about to unfold in in the next hour
and and so on which is beautiful it's
it's exactly what what I was hoping we
can do give give the people that join us
a sense on the front end of what we are
about to unfold in in the way you just
described that you were
again describing three layers there as
as you talked about first making contact
with this intelligence appreciating this
intelligence and then you're describing
that as you engage with that
intelligence there is an aspect of
communion a fuller
whole person experience and then the
deeper inside that you discover the a
sense of compassion and and intimacy so
and you say that the universe is
interested in our experience of it what
do you believe about why that is the
case
well first of all uh part of my
experience has been the classic teaching
in some of the Eastern Traditions that
the essence of the individual is the
same as the essence of the totality that
Atman is brahmana that our our nature is
the nature of the Divine which is the
nature of reality itself so
it's not completely true to think of
this in terms of a duality between me
and it at a deeper level
my being is a fractal emanation
manifestation of its reality of its
truth so our relationship is
um
uh
it's deeply essential and mutually
participating right from the start but
in terms of function in terms of
crispacia's actual function I am so
small and it is so vast that relatively
speaking there's a relative Duality uh
involved and of course it's not just the
small bit and the totality but between
the totality and my little small bit
there's layers and layers and layers and
layers it's a very very complex organic
system of massive scale
uh
so my to get to the focus of your
question my experience has been
that as I went through my spiritual work
and went through my spiritual practice
psychedelic practice and went through
the initiations and the cycles of death
and rebirth that I'm sure we'll talk to
later
and opened into
uh periods where I would spend hours
absorbed in communion and dialogue or
with this intelligence and then as I
would begin to
get smaller and come back into my normal
shape and size so there was a window
that would open and stay open for hours
and then a window that would close I
repeatedly had the sense of that this
intelligence was so pleased to have this
opportunity
to share to commune to convey it not
just not with me but with Humanity as a
whole that we are just getting after
13.7 billion years we are just getting
able to begin to embrace to open up to
the scale of the intelligence of the
universe
so that we for 13.7 billion years this
intelligence has been creating this
universe This Magnificent Garden
and holding it while we evolve slowly to
the point where we can just begin to
become aware of what it has been doing
and it seems to be so uh pleased to be
able to share consciously what it has
previously been constructing
unconsciously
the idea of seeing ourselves as a
fractal of the whole inside a
nested reality that is interpenetrating
carries some some powerful
propositions and ideas that that we will
unfold and you unfold in
uh your book because what it says is
that as I change in myself is you
changing yourself because we are a
fractal of the whole we in some way
facilitate and catalyze
a bigger change so so we are participant
to this unfolding
gigantic story that you are describing
absolutely we are participants we are uh
an expression of the creative process we
are continuance of the creative process
and we are learning to be generators
more and more conscious generators of
the creative process yes so would it be
a right to say that when you suggest and
when we contemplate that the universe is
interested in us in humanity
that it's a form of the universe
interest in itself in its own Evolution
that it comes to experience through
its beloved human
I think so I I think that's you know
that's widely viewed Insight in many of
the mystical traditions of the world
that
um there's a deep collaboration and uh
the in this intelligence is interested
in its expansion and we are in some ways
at this point in time one of the cutting
edges
of this expansion its learning
well so let's begin to explore a little
into and through the the journey just
there to to pick up on
your description that we are at the
Leading Edge of something that's
evolving through this universe and you
describe in session six
the vast community of explorers and you
write I experienced explorers in
different fields of learning as part of
a vast Cooperative Enterprise
what do you believe about and how did
you experience then and when you reflect
now on this community of explorers in I
I get a visual sense of people who are
in different spaces and domains right at
the edge The Cutting Edge of discovery
well you know uh as I was first trained
in as an historian and then as a in
philosophy of religion and so I spent
you know years and years and years
studying some of the great thinkers in
history in these fields and so I had a
real sense of
uh great beings and great
autobiographies who have contributed
systematically to the tapestry of
learning that I was an inheritor of in
in various ways
uh and this session was really about
um it was helping liberate me from a a
felt sense of responsibility to the
intellectual lineages that I had been
educated into
uh it was as if I was above the Earth
and I was watching these beings through
time through history do make their great
contributions to art and literature and
Science and and philosophy and Theology
and uh usually I would be just
intimidated by
um you know genius you know how great
they were but here I I felt myself as a
a young learner entering the company of
older Learners and entering into the
fellowship of learning but then the next
step was
I came to see I I was given a survey of
all the knowledge that I had acquired
through all the years of college and
graduate school and I was given a series
of lessons which taught me the
incompleteness of this knowledge and
then I was shown a new way of doing
philosophy that was opening in my life
with this work
uh and I believe that psychedelics
represent a revolution
in the way of doing philosophy not just
certain insights into Consciousness but
how philosophy can be done and and this
new way is to First systematic
systematically expand the boundaries of
experience to enter into non-ordinary
States Of Consciousness which of course
Humanity has been doing for thousands
and thousands of years to meditation
yoga trance dance and also psychedelics
but moving into non-ordinary State of
Consciousness in my case with
psychedelics
paying very careful and critical
attention to what happens in those
experiences
come back and record them very precisely
as exactly as possible within 24 hours
and then to reflect on them to integrate
them to integrate them with bodies of
knowledge and other disciplines and to
compare them to the experiences that
other people are having in these states
and that by systematically expanding and
Contracting Consciousness in this way
but not just having interesting
experiences that intellectually
digesting those experiences
internalizing those experiences
what I think we're able to do is that we
can begin to think about things and to
understand things and talk about things
that previously
most human beings could never talk about
could never Envision only the most
sophisticated Mystics in the most
esoteric Traditions could have access to
some of these domains but with
psychedelics if they are handled
responsibly and and conscientiously
even a modest a person of modest means
can have access to this reality these
realities and begin to understand
some of the workings of the universe
that are revealed through these states
because that's our as our mind changes
its sensitivity
we begin to be able to experience
different aspects of the cosmos so it's
like the color spectrum we see a certain
portion of the visible spectrum but when
we could slide our our awareness to a
different portion of the spectrum A
Different World of Color opens to us the
same way with Consciousness so what I
what this session gave me was
intellectual permission
to not try to prove everything
to the satisfaction of my peers to
rather begin a new methodology in
philosophy that may not be recognized
for generations
and it would take the rest of my life to
really carry out and that's why I did
this work for 20 years of psychedelic
exploration and then I spent another 20
years thinking about and digesting those
experiences before publishing diamonds
from heaven
would it be correct to say that so in
any of the pathways to Altered States
that whatever we come into contact with
whether you view it as a stream of
intelligence or or whatever way you
frame this that it depends still
on the frame of reference that you have
cultivated before so in your case your
various studies and and and research and
and work in philosophy and religion
provided in a way inner scaffolds inner
structures
for the experience that you were
going through by way of translation that
is to say if somebody else showed up
adjacent through an adjacent experience
but with different scaffolds with
different inner topography they would be
interpreting their experience possibly
differently would you how would you
restate what what I'm trying to get to
and sense there good point and really an
important thing to consider it's not
just a question it's not just whether
they would interpret their experiences
differently but would they actually be
having different experiences because
their conditioning was different going
into the experiences this is a
discussion that I've had with Ken ring
one of the founders of near-death
episode research and the author of a
number of books and he and I published
our dialogue around this particular
point in an article called our deep
psychedelic experiences trustable do
they simply reflect the conditioning of
the personal psyche or the even the
collective psyche or do they actually go
beyond one's conditioning and give us
access to something truly veritical
about the universe
and I want to be I want to honor both
sides of of this discussion because I
subscribe to what some have called the
participatory model of spiritual
experience which means these experiences
are not like apples hanging on the
cosmic tree that you just reach up and
pluck and they're just there for the
taking and anybody can reach up and
pluck them and it's there for the taking
it's a much more complex Dynamic that's
involved
but and I'll explain that in a minute
but first I want to say that my
conditioning
was shattered again and again and again
as I took this journey and I think
that's true for people who work
systematically with these states that in
the beginning our conditioning
has a strong coloring and shaping the
role
and simply our personal history has a
shaping role but very quickly after
several years you reach a point where
you get past all the conditioning that
you've had
even in from birth forward and you're
you're you literally your entire
physical existence collapses and in that
collapse one moves Beyond territory that
you've ever known intellectually are
the I think my my academic background
helped me understand what I was
experiencing but did not
structure what I was experiencing I was
often wished though I had phds in in
physics and astrophysics in particularly
to better understand some of the
phenomena that I was being shown
but
instead of picking an apple from a tree
I think it's something like this
as I have experienced it the the mind of
the cosmos the mind of the universe is
an infinite Lake of infinite potential
capable of giving us infinite variety of
experiences
and our mind acts like a seed Catalyst
that we drop it into this infinite
potential and it catalyzes a certain
response a certain set of experiences
which reflect that seed Crystal
as we internalize those experiences we
go through a process of purification and
transformation which changes the nature
of our individual Consciousness so that
later when we return to that infinite
Lake where the seed Crystal that we drop
into it has been changed expanded and it
precipitates a different set of
experiences out of its infinite
potential this is what I mean by it's a
participatory cosmology a participatory
model and it's not that
our our Consciousness creates or
dictates what emerges it's just that
there is a complicated feedback process
that's going and the more we go into
this the more we do it the more new and
new and New Frontiers begin to open that
are far beyond anything we could imagine
beyond anything
even against many of the things that
we've been taught it's just it's new
territory and then comes the task of
trying to make sense of what it was that
you experienced and these experiences
are kind of sequential it's like
exploring new territory so one
experience leads to another which leads
to another which leads to another in a
complex overlapping manner
so in the end you have to examine the
structure of the whole trajectory of
experiences because it's like a giant
jigsaw puzzle to puzzles yeah the there
is a potent
where you describe the very thing you
just uh painted for us when you talk
about the the foundational teaching
that finds you in session 16 which you
call self-generating fields of
experience
and you write we are self-generating
fields of energy in a living Universe we
generate energy by making choices and
the universe responds to this energy
that's what you were just describing
with a lake
in complex and subtle ways we are always
creating our own experience and then you
add we control the flow of energy out
from and back into our lives what comes
to us from without
originates from within the more one
moves towards one's Center and engages
the deeper levels of one's conditioning
the more one becomes conscious of being
the source of one's experience I suppose
that's what you were describing now in
in the way that Insight continues to
evolve uh with you it's a powerful
synthesizing of the human Journey
whether you do any psychedelics or not
because that Insight is true in the in
the normal day-to-day Consciousness you
don't need to be in an altered state to
realize it and or you can discover the
edge of your own experience
and realize that you actually
are the Catalyst of what it is that the
Universe brings to you
absolutely
this I'd like to I really hope that what
I've shared in this book
is used by and is useful to people who
never take a psychedelic whatsoever
because in the end psychedelics are not
critical
my understanding is that psychedelics
and particularly the the Psychedelic
that I used in my work LSD is an
amplifier of Consciousness it does not
give you any specific experiences it's
not a hallucinogen it doesn't give you
false Visions it is it amplifies
Consciousness that's all it does
how you use that Amplified Consciousness
how you caretake it how you protect it
isolate it internalize it meditate with
it and engage your mind during those
hours of hypersensitivity
is what determines the quality of the
perception that emerges from that
dialogue
so many people have written me and they
said
I've never taken a psychedelic in my
life I've been meditating for 40 years I
understand what you're writing about it
really parallels my own experience and
my own spiritual practice and I say yes
because it's not about psychedelics
we're exploring is the nature of
Consciousness to reveal uh the deeper
truths of its own being and of the
universe uh and so this idea that we are
self-generating fields of experience is
an ancient idea I mean it really is at
the core of the belief in karma and
rebirth that we are it's we are a
learning system
we are born in circumstances of our
choosing of our destiny we make choices
in response to those circumstances
we learn in response to those
circumstances and and in that process we
are changed and when we die that process
doesn't end but it continues and so what
I was experiencing was simply an
escalated and intensified vision of that
ancient teaching
you then describe later a cosmic tool
and you say that for several hours
the Consciousness that accompanied you
took you on a tour of the universe to
show you its work
and that it brought an overwhelming
sense of homecoming
what did you discover about the universe
through this tour and what was this
sense of homecoming
well this was my 19th session so by this
time I was about
three three four years into the work
and I had gone through ego death and I
had entered into what in the book I
described as the ocean of suffering kind
of a the hell Realms of of
the collective psyche the where the
collective psyche stores it's it's
most torturous memories of the history
of the species and I had navigated that
and
as almost a the gift or the grace
of because I had volunteered to
participate in a in a healing of some
aspect of the collective psyche the
universe gave me this gift many gifts at
that time and one of them was this
Cosmic tour
where it would take me and this is where
I wish I had degrees in physics so I
would be able to concretize our
conceptualize some of the things that
were showing me but over and over again
it took me and showed me
some aspect of our Cosmic reality and
overwhelmed I was overwhelmed repeatedly
by The Genius of it by the intelligence
of it by the intentionality of it
it taught me a lot about reincarnation
it taught me about the The Reincarnation
patterns of our species not just
individuals but of the Dynamics of
collective reincarnation it took me into
some of the formation structures of of
galaxies
and then
I'm not sure where there was this this
particular part or in the immediately
next it it took me I would go to a
succession of death and rebirth
processes internal to this tour
and it took me into deeper and deeper
levels of ontological Simplicity and I
began to experience a deeper and deeper
quiet
quiet Beyond any quiet I had ever
imagined and saturating the silence was
a sense of homecoming deeper and deeper
levels of homecoming and at one
particular transition I went into this
extraordinary peace extraordinary
homecoming
and I was overwhelmed by how sad it was
that we had lost contact with this
innate quality of our own being at this
Cosmic level
and I asked what what had happened
and it said this voice that was a comp
that the Consciousness I was with said
um we had left time we left time and
then it said we never intended so many
to get caught in time
it was as if linear time was simply one
of the experiments that the Universe was
having
so somehow moving deeper into home also
meant moving beyond the conditions of
space and time so this was a universe a
tour not only of the physical universe
but it was a tour of the levels of
reality behind the universe that kind of
give birth to space and time itself and
we come from these realities our
substance is made from these realities
so we participate inside the the Divine
creation of space and time
as a spiritual being who is rooted
in these spiritual realities
and we will get further to
both a Divine reality and the various
cycles of death and and rebirth but but
just to to pick where you started there
the the sense of suffering that you were
describing what what do you understand
stepping back and and looking at the way
you interpret
The Experience what do you understand to
be the significance of suffering in the
place of suffering in in The
evolutionary process why is suffering
part of the evolutionary process
that really is a core question isn't it
it's a deep question
and it's a hard question to answer
without preparing the ground well
and preparing the ground well would take
much longer than we have room for here
so I'm gonna have to take shortcuts and
I'm going to have to ask the Indulgence
of of your listener
um
during this same period of the cosmic
tour during the same year when I was
being given a crash course in cosmology
101. I was taken back to what appeared
to be the beginning of creation itself
the beginning of time and space
and I experienced an overwhelming love
just
completely saturating me and just
overwhelming me it was a Cosmic Love
and then I experienced all of evolution
the birth of space and time and all the
evolution of space and time taking place
inside this love
and this love was holding it and and
guiding it
and I
because of experiences that I had had I
knew that Evolution involved tremendous
suffering terrible suffering not just
for the human race but for species up
and down the evolutionary line but let's
just focus on the human race I knew
history and I knew how much
harm we had done to each other and how
much harm the planet had done to us and
how much suffering was involved
and in this experience I experienced all
of this suffering
as something that Humanity had taken on
as by free choice
and by free choice motivated by the
Divine love of creation that lies behind
creation
so that
the suffering that is inevitable
in an evolutionary project which is
stretched across billions of years
was not something which was being done
to us it was not a punishment it was not
being inflicted on us it was not the
work of demonic forces but it literally
was a burden that we had consciously
chosen in order to participate in this
creative project now why is there so
much suffering
there are layers and layers of a of a
response to this one of them is we make
choices sometimes we make good choices
sometimes we make bad choices we learn
by inheriting the consequences of those
of our choices and sometimes we inherit
bad
consequences from bad choices but I
think the answer is much deeper goes
much deeper than that
in order to understand
why human beings suffer we have to have
some understanding of what a human being
is and more importantly what a human
being is becoming we are not finished as
a species we are just beginning we only
develop sufficient Consciousness to un
to reach our minds down to the source of
our own mind about five thousand years
ago
we're going to be evolving for millions
and billions of years yet we are not
finished we are just getting started
much of the suffering inherent in human
existence has to do with the unfinished
nature of our own evolutionary process
there will come a time I'm sure that we
will have sufficient Consciousness and
sufficient self-control that we will be
able to wash disease out of our body
through complete control of our mind but
we're not there yet we we will be
capable of so many things that we are
not capable of now but that all of the
things we are going through now are part
of not only the learning exercise but
the building exercise of building a form
of human being
much more advanced than the form of
human being we are today just as Homo
sapiens is more advanced in Homo erectus
which is more advanced than our ancient
ancestors in the primate Kingdom
so I I think the core and the deepest
level of the answer to your question
what is the role of suffering in
evolution
the deepest level is that it's simply a
burden that we take on
voluntarily to participate in the joy of
creating
the universe of creating our species in
the universe and that in the end it
benefits us it's in some ways like the
suffering that a woman takes on when she
gives birth
she knows it's coming she does it
voluntarily it's absolutely terrible
it's really horrendous but when she
holds her child
it's worth it
and I think that's true for evolution
too there will come a time when we will
have evolved to a point where we will
look back on the entire history of all
that pain
without diluting it without denying it
and we will say it was worth it in order
to become what we have become today
so Central
etos in this is recognizing that we are
involved in an unfinished project as you
say
Evolution the universe is an evolving
unfinished project and you're making
right there in in your journey
some potent points about the the cost of
existence and of the physical universe
and and in that context as you just
framed it now
and this entire appreciation of the the
visible universe
as it contains only small parts of the
universe so which for us for all intents
and purposes the the dimensions that you
are describing that you said you wish
you had
astrophysics in your degrees in
education
some of those Dimensions is is what
scientists today describe as dark energy
and and and a dark matter which I Intuit
we can anticipate is a very crude
primitive definition of there's so much
more that is going to be discovered once
we are prepared to reintegrate the the
greater realities of Consciousness and
human possibility and escape this idea
that the the universe is a is a machine
that just reproduced the the same but as
you describe the
and and just painted the sense of the
physical Universe you're making a very
important point which is that the
universe is not
physical universe is not a trap not a
punishment that we have fallen into or
or from uh and and that there is this
purpose inherent in the totality of Life
which you describe as the continual
transformation the continual uh growth
so so for me what you're describing
there is a lucid and beautiful
distinction
about the project The evolutionary
project which you just narrated again
what else
must we whether you choose to do any
psychedelic or any other expedition to
Altered States what what else must we
understand about that relationship of
the Universe At Large physical universe
and us
as agents of the The Cutting Edge the
Leading Edge of this process
or you're asking good questions
let me step back and put this in the
context
um
all of the religions of the last five
thousand years the what are called the
axial age religions all came into
existence you know five three thousand
years ago
when we first began to get underneath
our individual Consciousness and tap
into spiritual consciousness and attach
into the consciousness of the universe
or the consciousness of the Divine
all of the religions of this era both
Western and Eastern religions are
examples of what I would call an up and
out cosmology and I understand their
intention when you begin to
experientially touch
Your Divine Essence
it is so much so ecstatic Phil so
bliss-filled so much more satisfying
Than Physical existence that how could
you not but think that you belong there
more than here and so all the theologies
that were given birth to in this period
are theologies of return which basically
say we don't belong on Earth we belong
in heaven somehow through some mishap or
some Misfortune or punishment with here
but what we want to do is get out of
here and get back to there
and whether it's by Western concepts of
Salvation being saved by faith
are Eastern concepts of reincarnation
where you evolve evolve evolve into you
wake up spiritually and when you wake up
the Hindus say they call that Moksha
Escape because you escape back to
spiritual Paradise so the whole agenda
of the axial age religions is to achieve
some type of catharsis which allows you
to abandon
time and space and to return home
but that leaves open the fundamental
question
what is the purpose of time and space
what is the purpose of the entire
created order
when we were thinking that the Universe
might be only 6 000 years old as many if
we did in ancient times
you might justify an open out cosmology
but now that we understand much more how
big our universe is how old it is and
how brilliant it is and how filled with
genius the idea that spiritual awakeness
spiritual fruition should result in
leaving
the physical Universe just doesn't ring
true as powerful it doesn't have the
same appeal and I think what's happening
is we are now growing up enough to
recognize the to understand that first
Vision but to see that it's actually a
very incomplete cosmology because now
we're beginning to understand that the
the next step after waking up are the
step of waking up to the reality of
one's divine nature and the
co-participation the coexistence of
divinity and physicality and physicality
itself as an aspect of divinity
then that opens up the possibility of
waking up and then
bringing Heaven to Earth bringing truly
the ecstatic experience
of heavenly Consciousness inside into
time space reality
and building
and truly shaping the physical world in
a way to be a reflection and an
embodiment
of spiritual paradise and that's where
we we find the importance of
emergent spirituality of a of a of a
embodied spirituality this theme which
is becoming more and more prevalent it's
not an escape of spirituality it's an
embodied spirituality and psychedelics
if they give us a sensitivity it's not
about getting up and out
it's really about getting more and more
deeply within to open up to bring it in
deeper and deeper and deeper Within
and so then the question becomes okay
now if we understand that if if that
speaks truth to us if we feel that
that's true
how can we do this hmm
and then the question becomes well now
we're talking practicalities yes well so
before we transition to to that
this axial Vision that you describe
of the Two Worlds described in in
different
um religious texts in in variety of
different ways so you're really
narrating
in your experience and updating
of that theological cosmological view
when you describe the sense of two
Cosmic beings
one that had the nature of a of a he and
one that had the nature of a shin and
you describe the the feminine
Cosmic being if if I get that correctly
as the one that devoted itself to the
creation of time and space and and
physical manifestation
and it's partnering intelligence in he
holding that other
part of of that compassionate
communion of Love describe describe what
that Insight was and and how it builds
on what you were just narrating that
that the the this next phase of
evolution in in what you were proposing
is actually those two parts of the of
the cosmic process getting integrated
and into penetrating into each other
such that they liberate each other of
their loneliness
I want to be careful and I want to
remind us that
a finite mind does as best as it can to
give cognitive structure to Transcendent
experiences so what I'm about to
describe is in terms of Justice you
summarize it a splitting of the Divine
principle into two halves a male half
that stays outside of time and space in
a Transcendent position and a female
half that begins the process of
manifesting time and space in the entire
physical Cosmos now I don't literally
think in terms of male female in this
way but this is the best my mind could
come up with to understand
so it's the principle that's important
the principle is that not all of the
creative intelligence manifest as
physical reality some of it stays and
holds the position outside physical
reality so there is a spiritual reality
which gives birth to physical reality
my experience was now as we are growing
up through thousands and thousands of
years millions of years of evolution we
finally have reached the point where
physical reality
sufficiently conscious that it can
return to Transcendent reality
and not merge but
enter into communion into con to
consummate a return
and this return doesn't lead to an up
and out exit but this return leads to
the Divine wedding the Divine marriage
the infusion deeper and deeper infusion
of the Transcendent Divine and the
imminent Divine I think of this as kind
of like white light the Transcendent
Divine and the imminent Divine is kind
of green light green energy so when the
white energy and the green energy fuse
we have awakened
resplendent
physical existence
with a Consciousness that far transcends
what we have known up to this point in
time and I think we see this in the the
lives of the great Mystics the lies of
the great spiritual teachers they they
are living a a absolutely grounded
physical life
and yet they are also living a
profoundly spiritual life
simultaneously and from that perspective
the Buddhists say Nirvana is samsara
samsara the world of form and Nirvana
the world of transcendence those are not
two separate realities those are now
coexistent realities in our lives that
is embodied spirituality and I would say
that one of the ways for us to describe
this is to that we are engaged in the
project of spiritualizing this world we
don't need to go to another world to
gain the spiritual experience we we are
in the physical form to help
spiritualize this world part of the
report from these Journeys that you're
offering us is a validation that indeed
we have entered a time where you don't
need to be high llama or just a the
special priest it actually is an
invitation for Humanity at large to each
in our own way become participant in
what you called earlier the The
Fellowship of learning and then become
involved in the
in The evolutionary project so I want
here now to start to make the next
transition for you to describe
the the realization of the relationship
between the the personal Awakening
and the collective Awakening and how you
have gone through these different cycles
of death and rebirth through this
experience and the significance of this
and how do they facilitate Collective
Awakening
well first what I'm going to describe is
my variation on an ancient teaching
in Buddhism for example when one sits
down to meditate or do some form of
spiritual practice the first thing they
do is cultivate what is called
bodhichitta and bodhichita is the wish
to save all sentient beings so you do
this practice not for your personal
benefit you do it to nourish the
uplifting of the whole of creation the
last thing you do at the end of your
practice is what's called distribution
of the Merit you give all the blessings
you've acquired you don't try to hold
them to yourself you give them away so
everything you're doing in in mature
spiritual practice is not for your
personal benefit it's for the benefit of
the whole
these ideas show up in the spiritual
Traditions up and down the line
so the way this showed up in my practice
and my psychedelic practice
I began my psychedelic practice thinking
that this was part of a personal
transformation so I would I would go
through some purification process some
death rebirth process that would result
in my personal healing and my personal
Liberation perhaps or something but it
was always sort of personally referenced
but what happened was after about two
years after I had gone through a lot of
personal cleansing and had relived my
own birth and gone through a death
rebirth process and had my Earth
identity shattered
I entered into a new cycle
a very very intense purification
processes but they were not personal
they were Collective
they systematically got larger and
larger for two years until they were
they included the experiences of
hundreds millions of human beings over
thousands of years and there were
periods of just intense Agony and
suffering and violence
and at first I thought this must be some
form of a deeper ego death
but it went on for so long
and it involved so many beings that
eventually I came to a new way of
thinking about it and it was very
challenging it took me years to even
admit this possibility
but what I came to eventually was the
conviction that in these sessions I was
not working to heal or transform my
individual being
but I was being used cooperatively to
heal and transform my entire Human
family that the pain that I was engaging
was not part of my personal pain or even
my reincarnational soul pain but it was
it was part of the pain of humanities
history itself that this pain of History
was lodged in the collective psyche just
as my personal pain might be lodged in
my personal psyche Humanity's Collective
pain was lodged and stuck in the
collective psyche and somehow by
becoming as large as these sessions
allowed me to become
I was able to take on this suffering and
to digest it just as at an earlier time
I had taken on and digested my personal
suffering
as a result of making this choice of
allowing this to happen
the universe began to not only take me
deeper into its pain which lasted about
two years and then there was a crescendo
and then it was finished I I was not
taken back into this territory anymore I
went beyond but the universe took me
deeply into
A Spiritual Awakening process which was
that again not personal it was
Collective it began to take me into the
future into what I came to call Deep
time and it took me there not as an
individual but as a field of energy
somehow encompassing large swaths of the
of the collective psyche
and I had repeatedly this experience
that there is no ultimate membrane
between the individual and the
collective between the individual and
the species everything that the
individual is is a distillation of
something that's going on in the species
and the species is the collection of
everything that's going on in its
individual manners pick any problem any
issue that anybody is working on in
their life and they would not have that
issue if it weren't for some pattern of
this issue
that's really touching the lives of many
many people in the Human family
so that I learned over and over again in
many different settings in context that
the work of spiritual transformation of
the individual and the work of spiritual
transformation of the collective as a
whole are all intertwined and there are
no absolute boundaries there are
relative boundaries but there are no
absolute boundaries so that my book this
my book dark naturally Dawn I described
this in terms of The Dark Knight of the
soul and The Dark Knight of the soul is
a very very intense period of spiritual
purification that takes place before the
individual Mystic awakens into spiritual
realization
but here I was talking about the dark
night of our Collective Soul that
Humanity as a whole is going through a
dark night a period of profound
purification which I think by analogy is
a period which is leading up to a
profound Spiritual Awakening for
Humanity as a whole I I don't many
people have said this we are past the
age of individuals Enlightenment now we
either become enlightened as a species
we either wake up as a species or we're
going to lose this planet
my work has been about Collective
transformation not personal
transformation so much an implicit
Insight this this Insight is also the
idea that anybody you can choose to work
on your individual struggle or on your
individual healing and when you work on
the individual you can choose uh
devotionally or by sentiment or by a
frame of mind
recognize that your work on yourself is
part of your contribution to the Holland
and if you make that internal
inclusion and integration you become
part of the fellowship of learning and
healing and
essentially you you opt in to The
evolutionary project yeah now you are in
the new evolutionary project whether or
not you recognize it whether or not you
opt in your part in it you are hardwired
into it but if you recognize it then you
can consciously participate and that
deepens and enrichens that process
and then as the journey continued you
moved from the personal to the
collective and to the archetypal and to
the higher archetypal Dimension describe
what these Realms and and these cycles
of death and rebirth meant for you in
this discovery
well after two years of working in what
I came to call this Collective suffering
the ocean of suffering
and experiencing the blessings of
insights that were also coming in a
chapter I called
um the initiation into the universe
where I was given these teachings of
cosmology 101
the suffering kind of reached a
culmination it's hard to describe but it
was kind of a collective breakthrough
and then it spun me into a level of
reality that was stunningly old it was
ancient and for the next year and a half
it kept bringing me back now it's always
Progressive so it would take me back to
that level of reality and every time I
entered that reality what was stunning
about it was it was ancient and it was
more real
then physical time space was and that's
very disorienting you know to think that
there is a reality which is more real
Than Physical reality it just completely
shattered me but it was such a
consistent part I had to no trans but to
choice but to
yield and give in to that
so part of your struggle part of your
struggle in the journey must have been
the how do you stabilize these insights
and awarenesses when you need to come
back to to teach in the classroom and
and be a family man and all the rest of
that wherever I was on Saturday in my
inner work on Monday I was back in the
classroom teaching my courses which is
part of the very grounding it's really
really important if you're going to go
deep you have to be grounded you have to
Lifestyle of commitment to grounded
practice and for me that grounding was
provided by my family and by my teaching
my students always but it is difficult
and there's one thing I'll mention that
every time you break through to a new
level of reality
it's cognitively very confusing you
don't understand what you're
experiencing at first and when you write
up your description it has gaps and
fragments but if you go back again and
again to that level of reality
eventually your mind learns to adapt to
it and you begin to be more capable of
having more coherent experiences there
so in the beginning your your write-ups
maybe have holes in them but with
repetition those holes are filled in and
you have more complete pictures this is
part of what I mean by cultivating the
philosophical discipline that's required
to have coherent sustained experiences
of deeper levels of reality the second
part that's required is and this is a
again this applies at multiple levels of
of the adventure
higher levels of reality
are deeper levels let's say of reality
or higher levels of energy every deeper
level of reality functions at a higher
level of energy
so when I made the transition into
archetypal reality I went through huge
purification processes in which I was
dissolved into white hot lava plunged
into burning Suns just tremendous fields
of energy that just burning more and
more out of me
and if I hadn't gone through that I
wouldn't have been able to have coherent
Consciousness because you literally
you have to become a being
that can live at that level
for hours at a time even only
temporarily in order to have coherent
cognition at that level so to enter into
archetypal reality yeah it takes us to
capture the the principle you're
describing there because that would be
the case
not just in the Psychedelic experience
but in any developmental Journey because
if you are to embrace lawn chair and and
more potent Realms than
there are several processes that will
have to take place for a start what you
are describing is you're being rewired
on the inside because there are
different circuitries in your brain and
and in in the energy field that you are
that get activated get switched on in
the process and then secondarily once
you are engaging with higher level of
potency the what you describe as
purification process your system need to
cleanse and need to actually release any
of the residue of the previous
infrastructure that you were part of
because what you're describing that the
universe is a compassionate loving
actuality but it's not socialistic
environment rather it is a gradient it
has levels and dimensions and those can
sometimes interpenetrate but there are
also containers that
for the sanctity of their and the
Fidelity of the process they must be
retained and if you are as a as a human
vessel to enter these Realms your system
your physical system need to be rewired
and updated to be able to manage that
and the 51 of the work is actually
stabilizing the work that you got
exposed to that's how I would translate
what you just shared Through My Lens of
of non
psychedelic experience but engaged on on
The Cutting Edge of the spiritual and
developmental Journey
absolutely and all we're seeing is a a
particular variation of a universal
pattern that if you want to open to
deeper truths into a deeper
participatory relationship with the
universe you have to empty yourself of
everything which is keeping you small
you have to empty yourself of all ways
of thinking old ways of feeling and all
of these thoughts and feeling patterns
have biological correlates so you go
through a detoxification process which
is physical as well as mental and
emotional
when a when a monk in Tibetan Buddhism
wants to receive
higher levels of teaching teachings
which are capable of generating
Awakening or Enlightenment they must
first do What's called nundra the
Preparatory practices which of the 500
Preparatory practices are five practices
you do a hundred thousand times each and
one of those practices is doing full
body prostrations while reciting
prayerful mantras
so you're you're going on the ground
you're lying down you're getting up
you're praying you're going on the
ground you're lying up and you're not
only retuning your mind with these
mantras and you're retuning your heart
with the devotion of these mantras but
you literally are working your body and
working your body to purify your body
while you are purifying your mind and
your heart and this is the way it is for
all spiritual practice isn't it we
always are having to purify ourselves
and if
if psychedelics push you into a higher
state of consciousness kind of quickly
you then have to purify after you go
into that State of Consciousness do
either you either need to do that you
either need to pay on the front end or
during or after yeah
or pay me later but you have to pay yeah
the the one distinction I'd make and I'm
interested in in your comedy so some of
those Buddhist practices they emerged in
ancient times what we're describing is
that Humanity has now entered an
environment a universal environment
where you may be able to go through
an accelerated Journey not just in the
way you have done that Journey but
because in in metaphoric terms or in
actual terms we can say the universe
has come has drawn nearer to the human
realm that's part of the epical shift
that we are experiencing at this time
such that because of what you are
describing that we have entered the the
phase of collective Awakening
we may be in one lifetime
go through maybe able to go through an
accelerated Journey especially when we
engage with the with the exercise not
through the lens of the individual but
as part of the the bigger project of of
the humanity participating in The
evolutionary process yeah
and so if you open your individual life
whether it's a spiritual practice or
psychological transformation or even as
you engage diseases in your physical
body to this larger Collective landscape
landscape then I think you participate
in this evolutionary project in a new
and intense fashion also if you are
engaged in Social transformation if
you're trying to bring working for
social justice working for True equality
in our health care Delivery Systems and
so on and so forth with a conscious
understanding that this is the time we
must change our culture we must change
our historical practices we must let go
of the divisions of the history we must
lay a foundation for a future that works
for all of its citizens not just for
some of its citizens than that too you
even if you're not meditating even if
you're not doing those internal
practices if you're social activists
then that too is part of this larger
deep transformation and I think you're
right I think what we're finding is in
spiritual practitioners and Visionaries
in many different lineages are coming to
the same conclusion that everything is
speeding up uh that our evolution is
speeding up and humanity is coming to a
critical Pivot Point a bifurcation point
a point of critical instability that we
are we either grow up
or we probably go extinct we cannot
continue to manage the planet with the
lower level of Consciousness that we
have been operating out of in the past
we have to achieve a breakthrough
of depth and breadth in order to grow up
to the species that's been growing
inside of us for thousands of years and
I think I understand this in terms of
reincarnation it's like we've been
reincarnating and reincarnating and
reincarnating with we've been learning
bits and pieces learning and learning
and learning
and I think what's happening is as the
world is trying to become an integrated
whole as a planet we're dealing with
problems the magnitude of which we
cannot solve at a local level they have
to be solved at a global level
likewise individually intro psychically
we are bringing together all of the
lives and all of the karma from all of
our previous lives we have lived in
every race we have been every race on
the planet we have been every religion
we have been every nationality we have
all these lives inside of us and now
whereas in the past
we would the world has torn itself apart
Nation against Nation race against race
likewise all these divisions are inside
of us and as we become one and whole we
fuse that history into one integrated
being and in that process we support
Humanity that is fusing its past into
one integrated being and that's giving
birth to what I call the diamond soul
just before we get to the the Diamond
Revelation
um and experience
what bridging will you offer I mean what
you just framed there is that a way to
view the The Meta crisis unfolding in
just any and every aspect of of life on
the planet right now we can choose to
view it as the living Crucible The
initiatory Crucible of this evolutionary
project in a way forcing us to realize
that we can't do it on our own we have
to come together so what bridging
comment will you offer about that
Journey where you appreciate the
archetypal and earlier on and through
that you you come to some vision of the
birth of the future human that new
species that that's arising what else
what other scaffolds you want to put
there before we
explore the sense of diamond luminosity
well
what I share with you now doesn't come
from an intellectual basis it doesn't
come from books I've read and I wish I
could give it that and give you
footnotes and you know that type of
documentation that academics love to
give but I I have to speak to you only
out of my spiritual experiences only out
of my psychedelic experiences
and over the course of this long journey
I was plunged into a series of
initiations and initiation Visionary
experiences
and what I shared in that last statement
is basically simply what was given to me
what was shown me with consistency that
humanity is coming into a critical time
a critically instable time a bifurcation
time a bifurcation point
that the world was entering into a
global crisis that seemed to be driven
by a cascading series of ecological
crises that these ecological crises were
hitting us again and again and causing a
profound breakdown
uh a breakdown that already many people
see it coming and it is so severe many
very wise people think that it's an
Extinction event we are really going
extinct as a species we will not be able
to survive what's coming
my experience as a Visionary in the
Psychedelic condition is that that is
not what's going to happen that we are
coming into a time of acute suffering
acute
dismantling a a surrendering of the past
but in that process we will give birth
to something extraordinary not simply a
new civilization or a new culture and
not simply a new economics or a new
industrial production a green production
we are literally giving birth to the
next form of the human being the future
human
uh and
I couldn't have dreamed this up I
couldn't have made this up and but it's
been a it's been to me a vision which
was given me starting in the late early
90s culminating in 1995
and it was given to me not as a
Visionary experience of what will be
but at great
after great work
I was taken into what I call Deep time
and taken into the future taken into
whole time and was experience this
transformation of humanity is undergoing
as what has happened
but all simultaneously what will happen
but also what has happened well Tommy
what time is non-linear so you you could
be in those different
positions and experiences concurrently
yes and so for me it is out of that
basis that I say this is an initiatory
event it is not an Extinction event it
is a process that we will go through now
we can go through it
kind of
clumsily and awkwardly and and dragging
our heels or we can go through it
cooperatively uh with vision and
foresight and we can accelerate our way
through it or we can fight it and make
it'll become worse
right that's our choice I mean you said
you you all we all grow we either go we
drag get dragged through or we walk
through with Elegance
and that's our choice now do we go
forward with vision
or do we try to hold on to the past or
try to go back to some time in history
when things were easier they made sense
or do we Forge ahead into a new future
so this must have been
and in many ways you described that
since the the realization of that the
feeling experience communion of that and
and the calling that that makes that
became a driving issue just stabilizing
that and and operating in in life was I
imagine a a challenge by itself when you
speak of it now
it it it lives in you as as powerfully
and as passionately uh all while you you
communicate that this is a
an experience and a set of insights that
you must contain because it's it's not
about jumping on on rooftops and and
screaming it actually is about
containing and giving birth to the
realization of these extraordinary
shape-shifting events that are unfolding
right as we speak on the global stage
and that these are theaters of
experience through which the individual
the collective the archetypal
Consciousness that The Human Experience
represents
can be transformed to become
participatory in in The evolutionary
process
yes exactly when I first had the this
kind of culminating breakthrough after
years of these visions and I experienced
the death and Rebirth of humanity
it took me about a year to recover it
was such a powerful experience it was
like as I say in the book it was like
walking around Hiroshima a week before
the bomb was dropped
and I had such profound compassion and
such deep respect for every person that
I was seeing because my understanding
was that each one of us
chose to Incarnate at this time in
history knowing what we were getting
into knowing that it was going to be
hard knowing that it was going to be
very very difficult but there are no
victims here there are only Saints
they're only volunteers who have chosen
to participate in this and that every
person here whether or not I agree with
them politically or whether you know
whatever whatever our differences may be
every person here deserves my complete
respect because they are a soul who has
chosen to participate in this historic
transformation
and then
you will let later
into the diamond
luminosity and its Discovery this
describe that transition please
well I have to back up just a little bit
because I described going into
archetypal reality and I haven't
described too much about what went on
there but let's just kind of jump over
that
and then I went through another death
and rebirth process and then I entered
what I came to call causal mind or
the universe experienced a condition of
Consciousness where everything is one
that all the diversity of Life pulses as
a single life form just a single
totality an overwhelming absorbing
experience in the fundamental Oneness of
life where my boundary is dissolved
completely not only my personal
boundaries but I saw that there were no
boundaries from this perspective
throughout the entire universe that we
all were
aspects of this fundamental Oneness and
I experienced what the Buddhist called
shunyata emptiness emptiness of self
transparency there was another session
where I was taken into the cosmic void
into the fertile void out of which
the universe emerged an experience of of
overwhelming Cosmic Love
and that went on for a year I just was
absorbed an extraordinary blessings
and I was completely
satisfied as a philosopher I was totally
satisfied I
um and then I went through yet another
death rebirth experience a very intense
death rebirth experience
and when I came through it
I was taken into
a consciousness of clear clear
light just I had known light many times
before light had shown up in many death
rebirth processes but this was different
this was an exceptionally
hyper clear luminosity
and I came to call it the diamond light
the diamond luminosity
and when I looked at other sources in
the spiritual literature again Buddhism
is one of the ones I know the best and
when I studied the Buddhist literature I
think this is what they call dharmakaya
the Clear light of absolute reality
it is a light so clear
that it eventually becomes invisible but
it's just crystalline clear and in that
Clarity there is an ecstasy that goes
beyond Bliss
um
Beyond any of the Ecstasy associated
with form because this is pure
formlessness
once I touch this
then the only thing I wanted to do was
get back to it I mean once you touch
this kind of diamond Luminosity
everything else
becomes insignificant
and over the next four years
in 26 sessions
I only went back into the diamond
Luminosity four times
about once a year
and in between those four sessions there
was sessions of intense purification
more purification you know more and so
on so forth
in the middle of that cycle
I had the experience of the Great
Awakening the experience of the death
and Rebirth of humanity so the diamond
Luminosity work started developed then I
had the experience of
future Awakening of humanity and then I
went back into two more years of work
with two more initiations into the
diamond luminosity
in the first two sessions I went deeper
and deeper into the diamond luminosity
and then in the last two the diamond
Luminosity crunched itself deeper and
deeper into my physical body into my
mind and I experienced it kind of
remaking me almost at a cellular and I
don't understand the process but it was
infused it was entering into my body so
that eventually it changed not only
how I think and how I feel it gave me a
brief Glimpse in my very very last
session
of a change in my vision
I I had an experience of seeing
a hundred times clear a hundred times
more refined than I had ever seen in my
ordinary Consciousness and it wasn't a
hallucination it was what I came to call
Diamond vision and I and then after
about 10 minutes
it disappeared and I was back to my
ordinary Clear Vision and that's when I
began to understand that the future
human that we are giving birth to
is not only a human being with a healed
and expansive heart
and not only a human being with an open
mind open to deeper communion with the
universe
but it's a human being which lives
physically differently
all of our senses are not simply
biomechanical processes they are
functions of the level of Consciousness
we hold within the body
and so our vision is capable of
infinitely more refinement than in our
hearing and our tastes and our touches
so when we talk about bringing Heaven to
Earth it's not simply like you know a
social nice Harmony social you know
we're talking about
weaving Divine consciousness
activating Divine Consciousness inside
our body so that our body becomes
profoundly satisfying capable of much
much more refined sensory experience not
just emotional and what you're
describing what you're describing
they're building on everything you said
earlier
is the universe is interested not just
in Altered human consciousness it wants
that Consciousness to permeate all the
levels of physical reality such that the
Universe can experience through us the
the sensory portal and the mental
portal and the embodied experience all
at a richer higher Fidelity higher
quality kind of a way
yes and I would say the way I think of
this is not so much that it can
experience though I'm I'm sure that's
true
but I think it's actually sharing with
us the gift of its capacity it's it's
literally kind of cloning itself it's
sharing
it's sharing the gift of how it
experiences life with us and it's
growing us and growing us to allow us to
Incarnate and embody its experience of
Life at deeper and deeper levels and
that means it's an act of generosity
well Chris this has been a fascinating
exploration and I I so much appreciate
that uh you're able to both
narrate your experience integrate into
it your teaching and spiritual practice
and and also talk to it from
the extemporaneous experience of this
moment in time of being a conscious
being on this tormented Planet as
humanity is going through these
very difficult transitional events
but
what makes the whole difference I mean
the the teaching from Victor frankly is
if when you're in the most difficult
circumstance if you carry with you a
different
logotherapy a different reason a
different purpose a different awareness
a different recognition and insight
about what it is that you are undergoing
whether it's illness whether it's pain
about the the greater planetary
situation
there is a difference because do we
experience what we experience merely
personally or do we experience the
personal Dimension when we are
merged inside that greater actuality and
and that surge that inquiry that
struggle is actually part of the
spiritual work of this time which you
discovered through psychedelics my
experiences
it's accessible in the day-to-day
um
tasking of Life of being a parent and
and and a and a spouse and a teacher and
a leader and working through the
day-to-day struggles of life and asking
how can I make the higher choices how
can I be the better version of myself
how can I find resources to transcend
the the moment of conflict to to to
metabolize and transmogrify the the
moment of being triggered to instead of
acting out on being triggered to use it
as a trampoline to engage with a higher
Cosmic universal dimension of life that
that's the the invitation that I hear in
in your narrative yeah absolutely
there's psychedelics are totally
incidental they're simply how I
encountered these principles and one can
encounter these principles in so many
different forms in so many contexts
as we enter this dark night of our
Collective Soul which I think has begun
and it's going to get worse but as we
enter it we're going to hear people say
all sorts of things are going to offer
all sorts of interpretations that we're
being punished or this is the end of
time and this is you know that we're
being plagued by demons and or this we
we're be this is a punishment that is
owed to us and I think it's very
important that we have a deep vision of
what is being produced what is taking
place in history a vision of the future
human that we are in the process of
giving birth to inside ourselves and
collectively
if imagine a woman who's giving birth
and she doesn't know that she's pregnant
and she doesn't know anything about
Labor or what's actually taking place
what a horrible day it would be but if
she understands that she's giving birth
to a new life then it all kind of
coheres
to to see the intelligence of the
universe and the compassion of the
universe you have to look very very deep
because on the surface the universe does
not appear to be very compassionate and
it doesn't appear to be very intelligent
it appears to be a really brutal being
to see that compassion you have to
understand existence at a very very deep
level and as we enter this time in
history particularly this Century we
have to be capable of looking very very
deeply and when we look deeply
then we cooperate with that process of
transformation it doesn't require
psychedelics at all but when we record
when we participate and cooperate with
the challenges that we are living in our
immediate life in our immediate
circumstances and we find our way to the
highest good the highest choices the
greatest good for the greatest number
then we then we feed into good outcome
for the delivery of this future human
both in our own life
and in the lives of our children and our
grandchildren and to Future Generations
thank you for your commitment to the
inquiry and for your generosity this has
been an extraordinary Journey with you
today thank you and ADI thank you for
your work uh thank you for the work
you're doing in the world this is really
Noble and important work thank you for
our conversation
[Music]
thank you
along with our website at
portalsofperception.org portals is also
available on YouTube and on all podcast
platforms as well as social media you
can become an active member and join the
conversation in community events and you
can help us get the word out by liking
this content and by sharing it with your
friends